---
title: What is HTTP?
slug: what-is-http
description: ''
publishedDate: 2021-09-22T17:49:44.101Z
lastModifiedDate: 2021-09-22T17:32:39.415Z
draft: false
coverImage: ''
points: 10
---

## What is HTTP?

**HTTP** (or Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is a protocol generally used by web services for serving HTML documents. A client makes a request to a server for a resource and the server sends a response.

## What are the different methods of HTTP?

HTTP has a fixed number of methods that the client can use to indicate what type of operation it wants to perform via the request. These request methods are also known as HTTP verbs.

There are 9 HTTP methods:

1. GET
2. POST
3. DELETE
4. PATCH
5. PUT
6. HEAD
7. TRACE
8. CONNECT
9. OPTIONS

Of these, GET, POST, PATCH, PUT and DELETE are the most popular.

### GET

The **GET** request is used to request data from a server.

For example, when you visit an e-commerce website, the browser will do a **GET** request to fetch all the details. Once the server sends a response to the **GET** request, the browser will show a list of items.

Click on the **Submit** button below to do a **GET** request.

<HTTPClient method="GET" isRequestMethodChangeDisabled showSimplifiedResponse />

### POST

The **POST** request is used to send some data to the server.

For example, when you want to place an order on an e-commerce website, the browser will do a **POST** request to save that information on the server.

Click on the **Submit** button below to do a **POST** request.

<HTTPClient
	method="POST"
	isRequestMethodChangeDisabled
	showSimplifiedResponse
/>

### PATCH and PUT

The **PATCH** AND **PUT** requests are used most often to update on the server.

The main difference between **PATCH** and **PUT** is that **PATCH** is used to partially modifying a resource whereas **PUT** is used to update the entire resource on the server.

Click on the **Submit** button below to do a **PATCH** request.

<HTTPClient
	method="PATCH"
	isRequestMethodChangeDisabled
	showSimplifiedResponse
/>

### DELETE

The **DELETE** request is used to delete the specified resource.

Click on the **Submit** button below to do a **DELETE** request.

<HTTPClient
	method="DELETE"
	isRequestMethodChangeDisabled
	showSimplifiedResponse
/>

## What are status codes?

When the server returns a response, a three-digit number is also sent as a part of the response. This three-digit number is also known as the "status code". Status codes helps in identifying the type of the response:

| Name          | Range of status codes |
| ------------- | --------------------- |
| Informational | 100-199               |
| Successful    | 200-299               |
| Redirection   | 300-399               |
| Client error  | 400-499               |
| Server error  | 500-599               |

For example, a successful **GET** request will return a **200** status code.

Click on the **Request data** button in the component below to send requests to the **News application** server. The News application server will return some random status code.

<StatusCode />
